In this optional lecture,I will talk
about mean square convergence.Objectives
are to learn mean square convergence and
formulate necessary and
sufficient condition for
invertibility of MA(1)) process.
So, let's first define what
mean-square convergence is.
So, we have a stochastic process, right?
A sequence of random variables and
I'd like to say these random variables
are converging to some common
random variable and call it x.
But what do we mean with this
convergence if we have random variables.
Well we defined there are few definitions
of conversions of random variables what
we're going to concentrate on
is the mean squared convergence.
In other words,
we're going to say Xn converges to some
random variable X as n increases,
if I look at their differences.
Squared and I take the expectation of it.
So this is mean, and this is squared.
This is mean squared, some number.
And if this some number goes to
zero as n increases, which means,
as it increases, this random
variable is a different square.
Expectation of the different square is
actually getting smaller and smaller and
smaller.
Then we call xn convergence
to x in mean square sense.
In previous lectures,
we inverted ma1 model.
Which is this guy here xt
= zt + beta z t-1 into
an infinity model and
we write zt as infinite sum here.
So what we would like to say, we would
like to make sure this right hand-side is
convergent in mean-square sense.
So how do we say that we have to get
the partial sums and make sure that
partial sums of this infinite sum actually
converges to Zt in mean square sets.
Let's remember the auto covariance
function of MA(1) processes.
MA(1) processes of the covariance
function would be 0 after lag 1.
At lag 0,
it is 1 + beta squared times sigma square,
at k1 at lag 1,
it is beta Sigma square, and for
negative values this is an even function,
so Gamma k same as Gamma negative k.
So we're going to use these two guys here,
the Gamma 0 and Gamma 1.
Okay, let's find Betas so that the partial
sum then notice there is a n here now.
We cut the infinite sum at sum n.
And we have to make sure that
partial sum converges to Zt
as n increases in the mean-square sense.
In other words,
We have to make sure this partial sum,
this expression here,
is the partial sum until n minus Zt and
we square it and we take their mean,
their expectation.
This is the mean squared.
And we have to gain, we should find
betas where this expectation actually
drops to zero as n gets larger and larger.
So we have to do some
analytical work here.
Let's go slowly.
We take the square.
This is one big lump sum, big, big term.
Think of that as one big term and
this is another term.
The square of the first term,
square of the second term and
this is two times their multiplication.
This is usual a- b² formula.
But then, we have to take the sum squared.
And if you take the square of a sum,
you get the sum of squares.
This is basically square of the each term,
but
then we have to have pair-wise
multiplications times 2.
Now, one thing you have to
note here is that when we
look at the pair by multiplication,
we shouldn't look at more than one
because we know we know all the covariance
function drops to 0 after lag 2.
So we only have xt minus k with the next
guy only as k goes from 0 to n minus 1.
And if you multiply the coefficients,
we're going to have some odd
coefficient on top of negative beta.
In this term, zt is uncorrelated with
almost of them except the first guy,
which is xt, and
expectation of z squared is sigma square.
Here you take expectation to inside,
right?
The expectation is a linear operator,
expectation of x squares will give
you expectation of x squares.
This is going to be common for everybody,
this is basically the variance.
Covariance at lag 0 on a variance and
we have beta to the k.
In this then we take
expectation to inside,
we're going to have expectation
of this multiplication.
This expression we can put xt back into
the game, xt is zt + beta zt squared.
This is zt squared + beta, zt -1.
And both of them are multiplied by zt.
Now, this expectation of x squared,
this is literally gamma 0 so
we can pull this out.
This expression here, expectation of xt-
k, xt- k + 1, this is literally gamma 1.
We can pull this out.
Expectation of z is going to
be another gamma square so
we're going to have -2 gamma square here.
But these guys are uncorrelated.
So expectation of this will drop to 0.
So we have negative 2 gamma square
with that other gamma square,
we're going to have negative gamma square.
You put gamma 0 back into here which
is 1 plus beta square gamma square,
sigma square.
They put gamma 1 back into the game
which is beta sigma square and
we basically simplify this expression.
A lot of terms will get canceled.
And we obtain that expectation
of the different square here.
The mean square is actually sigma square
times beta to the 2n plus 2, right?
This n is the number of
the elements in the partial sum.
So what do we want for you?
We want this mean square to go
to the zero as it gets larger.
In other words, we mean this
expiration which we calculated to be
sigma squared beta to the 2n plus 2.
You want this guy to drop
to zero as it gets larger.
Sigma is constant.
Which means beta.
Absolute value of beta must be less than
one, so that this can go up to zero.
The conclusion is that we
can do this inversion,
we can inverse and make new process
into AR infinity process, but
we have to make sure that this series
is convergent and that convergence
only is the case when magnitude of
beta is actually less than one.
Now remember magnitude of the beta is less
than one means negative one over beta
is greater than one.
This guy is the zero of the polynomial.
So the zero of this polynomial
literally lies outside of the input so
what have you learned?
You have learned the definition of
the mean square convergence and
you have learned the necessary and
sufficient condition for
invertibility of MA(1) processes.